# Project Description

## Abstract

<div class="box">
    Global agricultural productivity must double by 2050 to meet the rising demand fueled by an increasing population
    developing higher standards of living <reference identifier="4" />. On a cellular level, crop yield is limited by
    the inefficiency of photosynthesis; the maximal energy conversion observed in plants has been less than 4%
    <reference identifier="2" />. Our project aims to improve this efficiency by implementing an alternative
    regeneration portion of the Calvin cycle. Alternative pathways, which use enzymes from other metabolic reactions
    that act on common metabolites used in the Calvin cycle, were first explored via computational modeling. The most
    promising of these pathways, which eliminates the enzyme SBPase and overexpresses transaldolase, was then
    demonstrated in vivo. By overexpressing transaldolase, a more continuous and robust pathway for the Calvin cycle can
    be generated. [insert sentence for what our results actually are and that we basically hope it will improve growth
    rate or yield, which can be implemented into higher plants such as crops to increase crop yield per plant].
</div>

---

## Project Description

<span class="image right"><img src="assets/images/pic02.jpg" alt="" /></span>Global demand for crop production is
expected to increase by 100% from 2005 levels by 2050 <reference identifier="4" />. We depend on high agricultural
productivity to fulfill numerous needs. Not only must crop production meet the direct requirements for human and
livestock food consumption, but it must also fuel the needs of a growing bioeconomy that demands bioenergy and
biopharmaceuticals <reference identifier="3" />. Despite the rising demand, production is threatened by a variety of
factors. This problem is accentuated by land limitations, as available crop areas shrink and land demand clashes with
environmental protection and sustainability requirements <reference identifier="3" />.

Similarly inspired by the aims of the
<a href="https://ripe.illinois.edu">RIPE project</a>, our project uses the application of synthetic biology tools to
improve the efficiency of photosynthesis. By improving photosynthesis, yield improves at the level of individual
crops, amounting to a greater harvest yield without increased land usage. Specifically, our project targets a major
inefficiency within the RuBP regeneration portion of the Calvin cycle. The Calvin cycle is the portion of
photosynthesis responsible for carbon fixation. Carbon fixation, which converts carbon dioxide into the usable organic
forms that plants use to grow, is a key determinant of crop production at the cellular level.

<span class="image left"><img src="assets/images/pic03.jpg" alt="" /></span>The Calvin cycle is dependent on the
continuous cycling of its intermediates. Many of these intermediates, however, can be consumed by other metabolic
reactions, thus depleting the Calvin cycle of its required compounds. Without these compounds, the Calvin cycle stalls
until the missing intermediates can be replenished. This constant pausing builds into major growth loss over the
course of the growing season for a plant. By limiting the number of intermediates, however, there is less potential
for other reactions to 'steal' these metabolites and thus drain the available pool.

Our project aims to reduce the number of intermediates in the Calvin cycle by implementing an alternative RuBP
regeneration pathway. The enzyme transaldolase, which is able to convert (the compounds to the compounds), reduces the
number of intermediates that can leave the cycle for other pathways. This results in a more continuous Calvin cycle
that allows for more carbon to be fixed in a given timeframe, therefore improving growth yield.

This alternative pathway was first simulated via computational modeling in order to predict the viability of the
pathway and explore potential ideal expression levels. The pathway was then explored in a laboratory setting using the
cyanobacterial strain Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942. Cyanobacteria are generally considered an ideal model organism
for exploration of and genetic manipulation of photosynthesis due to their malleable genome, homogenous population
when cultivated, and rapid growth rate <reference identifier="4" />.

Our work could be integrated into the similar systems of crop plants to increase yields, contributing to global food
sustainability for the growing population.

---
<bibliography />
