# Proposed Implementation

## Overview
Communities throughout the world struggle to meet daily nutritional needs. Combined with an increasingly unpredictable climate and a rising human population, food production is rapidly coming under a higher demand than it can sustain at current productivity levels. With no feasible way to increase the amount of land under cultivation, the only option that remains is to increase the actual productive yield of what crops are currently being cultivated. One solution is to improve crop yield by optimizing the process of photosynthesis, the incorporation of light energy into sugar molecules. Our project aims to design overexpression and deletion systems in cyanobacteria that drive forward RuBP regeneration. A more robust RuBP regeneration pathway results in more continuous RuBP regeneration, meaning photosynthesis is stalled less often. The more continuous the photosynthesis, the better a cell can grow.  Biomass production becomes more efficient at a cellular level when the efficiency of this metabolic component is increased. By demonstrating the technology in this model photosynthesizer, we hope that the technique can inspire similar experiments in crop plants that will boost crop yield per plant. 

---
## Proposed Implementation
We envision that our technology will be used by plant biologists and other researchers interested in improving photosynthetic efficiency. The resulting crop varieties could be cultivated by growers on a global scale, increasing crop production while decreasing agricultural land usage and maintaining the same labor requirements

Through well developed and documented procedures for genetic engineering in plants, we anticipate  that our cyanobacterial over-expression and deletion systems will be translated into common crop varieties such as tobacco, rice, tomatoes, potatoes, etc. Plant genetics has advanced from simply selecting and breeding individuals with desired characteristics. Now researchers can directly introduce genes for pest resistance, drought resistance, and improved flavor and nutritional content <reference identifier="25" />. Therefore it is entirely feasible to envision an agricultural industry where plants have been genetically engineered to do what they already do best; use sunlight to make organic carbon, just more efficiently.

A major challenge to this proposal is the shift from the genetic engineering of relatively simple prokaryotic cyanobacteria to complex multicellular plants. However, several methods for plant genetic engineering have already been developed and in use for decades. One approach is the transfer of transfer DNA (T-DNA) mediated by *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. This bacterium typically infects wound sites in plants to cause gall growth deformities, but this mechanism of infection has been exploited to transfer DNA to plant cells for genetic engineering. Another method includes collecting embryogenic cells and co-culturing them with *A. tumefaciens*, providing an advantage by early stage selection that ensures every cell of the adult plant has the desired genetic changes <reference identifier="21" />. Technological advances can provide even more options for gene editing, such as the widely renowned CRISPR-Cas9 system. 

Overall, we see the real application of this technology in the development of agricultural productivity to sustain the dietary needs of a growing human population. This mission is already being reflected in a current international project called Realizing Increased Photosynthetic Efficiency ([RIPE](https://ripe.illinois.edu)). Research facilities are collaborating on a global scale to target specific areas in the 170-step photosynthetic process to make improvements where it is feasible <reference identifier="24" />. Projects that use a multigene approach to stimulate electron transport and carbon regeneration may have already provided a direction for incorporating our research <reference identifier="26" />. Considering that there is an extensive community that shares our vision of optimizing plant productivity, we want our work to contribute to this crucial movement. Overall, we are driven by the idea that, without an increase in crop yields, we will not be able to sustain the human population. 

## Safety Aspects
Overexpression of our target Calvin-cycle enzymes, transaldolase and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase*, * is not known to lead to the production of toxic by-products. These enzymes are already natively expressed in cyanobacteria for their central metabolism; we are only altering the expression levels of these enzymes to exploit their ability to manipulate intermediates of the Calvin cycle. These enzymes are vital for the regular metabolism of photosynthetic organisms, including plants. Therefore there is not a reasonable risk of toxicity production if implemented into food plants. 

The main safety considerations stem from the consequences of genetic manipulation. We do not intend our genetically engineered cyanobacteria to be directly used in a practical setting. However, because we envision that the technology will be used in crop plants, there are specific national regulations and protocols that apply. We can expect that implementation of our overexpression and deletion systems in plants requires years of undisputable research and proof of its safety for consumption. High scrutiny and care is necessary because genetically modified organisms (GMOs) raise concerns regarding their potential impact on the environment and human health, and any other unintended effects of transgene introduction <reference identifier="22" />.

While the direct product of our target enzymes are nontoxic, it is important that we understand the secondary consequences of gene overexpression on metabolic flow. This is a common focus in genetic engineering, and is addressed by our modeling experiments. However, plants might respond differently to excess metabolite production than our single-celled prokaryote, which would require additional screening methods in future research. 

## Other Challenges
In order for our results to translate into practical use in crop plants, we must first clearly demonstrate that our system works in cyanobacteria and explain why we expect it to apply to higher plants. By utilizing proper documentation and communication, we hope that plant genetics laboratories can use our work for further research. 

Another hurdle involves choosing the right crops and genetic engineering methods that will optimize safety and efficiency. Although this is beyond the scope of our project, it would be a vital component in future work.  For instance, not all crop plants synthesize sugar molecules in the same manner. The Calvin-Benson cycle we are working with is part of C3  metabolism. This is in contrast to C4 metabolism seen in crops like maize, sugarcane, and sorghum, which spatially separates Rubisco from oxygen in the atmosphere. While work in C4  plants is exciting due to their already inherently high productivity, we must also consider that our system only applies to C3 cultivars such as tobacco, cowpeas, and soybeans.

Plant and bacterial differences must be considered; these organisms differ in their photosynthesis methods, genetics, and cellular organization. Years of evolutionary divergence might complicate and reduce the efficiency at which our system is incorporated into crop plants. Current crop cultivars have experienced years of selective breeding and hybridization that has extensively multiplied the chromosome copy number seen in certain species. Multiplication of the original haploid genome is known as polyploidy and it is a common occurrence in higher plants. Even considering that PCC 7942 also has multiple copies of its genome, the complexity is not as extensive in our single-celled prokaryote as these plants. Secondly, the multicellularity of plants requires additional care in ensuring that every cell has incorporated any genetic alterations. Otherwise, we can expect a mosaic effect in which only certain clones are overexpressing our target enzymes, which would make our system less effective and harder to evaluate.

Additionally, the random insertion of introduced DNA into the plant genome may lead to positional effects in which the expression of the transgene is silenced <reference identifier="23" />. This is a characteristic of eukaryotic organisms like plants, and increases variability in the results of genetic engineering.

Numerous unknowns may also affect future experimentation in plants, and we shall rely on ever-expanding scientific knowledge to unravel them. Despite these challenges, we are still confident that our research can support growth in plant genetics. 

---
<bibliography />

---
<explore pages="Proof_Of_Concept,Sustainable" />